= SageTeX =

== Description ==

The SageTeX package allows you to embed code, results of computations,
and plots from Sage into LaTeX documents.

== License ==

The ''source code'' of the SageTeX package may be redistributed and/or
modified under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published
by the Free Software Foundation, either version 2 of the License, or (at
your option) any later version. To view a copy of this license, see
[[http://www.gnu.org/licenses/]] or send a letter to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA
02110-1301, USA.

The ''documentation'' of the SageTeX package is licensed under the
Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 License. To
view a copy of this license, visit
[[http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/]] or send a letter
to Creative Commons, 171 Second Street, Suite 300, San Francisco,
California, 94105, USA.

== SPKG Maintainers ==

Dan Drake (ddrake at member ams org)

== Upstream Contact ==

Author: Dan Drake. Web: [[http://www.bitbucket.org/ddrake/sagetex]] and
[[http://mathsci.kaist.ac.kr/~drake]].

== Dependencies ==

To install, nothing more than a standard Sage install. The
{{{spkg-check}}} script will likely fail unless a complete (or nearly
complete) Sage installation is available, as it attempts to run Sage on
the {{{.sage}}} files associated with the documentation and the provided
example.

Of course, to fully ''use'' SageTeX, one needs a modern TeX
distribution.

== Notes ==

To use SageTeX, both Sage and LaTeX need to know about it. If you have
installed this spkg, then Sage knows about SageTeX; now you need to make
LaTeX aware of it. The easiest thing to do is to copy a directory to a
{{{texmf}}} directory in your home directory. For Linux/Unix users, do
{{{
  cp -r $SAGE_ROOT/local/share/texmf/ $HOME/texmf/
}}}
For OS X users with MacTeX:
{{{
  cp -r $SAGE_ROOT/local/share/texmf/ $HOME/Library/texmf/
}}}
After you've copied over the necessary files, you'll need to update
TeX's database so that it can find them. Run "{{{texhash $HOME/texmf}}}"
(replace the texmf directory as appropriate) to do this.

The directory {{{$SAGE_ROOT/local/share/texmf/tex/generic/sagetex}}}
contains documentation and an example file. If you have problems or
suggestions see [[http://groups.google.com/group/sage-support|the
sage-support group]].

Finally, note that you can actually use SageTeX without Sage! The
{{{remote-sagetex.py}}} script uses any remote Sage server to do the
computations for you. If you can't or don't want to install Sage on your
computer, you can use the {{{remote-sagetex}}} script to use SageTeX,
although if you are in such a situation, you probably want to get
SageTeX [[http://tug.ctan.org/pkg/sagetex|from CTAN]] instead of
downloading this spkg.

== Changelog ==

=== sagetex-2.2.1 (Dan Drake, 20 June 2009) ===

 * Update to version 2.2.1, which includes the remote-sagetex script and
   synchronizes with the current version available on CTAN.

=== sagetex-2.1.1 (Dan Drake, 28 May 2009) ===

 * Update to version 2.1.1, which adds pause/unpause support.

=== sagetex-2.0.2 (Dan Drake, 21 Apr 2008) ===

 * Update source, improve spkg-check.

=== sagetex-2.0.p0 (Dan Drake, 9 Jan 2008) ===

 * Proper SPKG.txt, spkg-check, md5sums
 * Split repos, get directory structure right

=== sagetex-2.0 (Dan Drake, 18 Dec 2008) ===

 * Initial release
